The Joe Rogan.
Experience. Very, not only individually, but I think we very,
uh, we become different creatures in different conditions. Sure.
So people sometimes will ask me like, what's your, you know,
what is human nature? What's your opinion, you know, based on these books.
And I say, it's like asking, what's the natural state of H two. Oh,
<laugh> right. It's it boiling? Is it ice? Exactly. What are the,
what's the pressure? What's the altitude. Yeah.
Don't you feel like you're different people with different people as well. Yeah.
Yeah. I had a girlfriend, um, a Spanish.
She was her mothers, French,
her father's catallan she was raised in Spain and then lived in Miami, uh,
when she was 13 to 15 or something. So she spoke English really well,
Spanish, French, and Katalan perfectly right.
And we were living in San Francisco and I was high.
I was smoking a joint.
She was across the room talking to her mom on the phone in French.
And then her mom put her dad on the phone, you switched to Kalan. And,
and I was just high enough that I noticed like, wow,
that's not Peggy talking two different languages.
And then three, cuz she would like put her hand on the phone and say,
oh my mom said no, no, no. So English, French Kalan.
It's not Peggy speaking three languages.
Those are three different Peggys she's different.
Her facial ticks and her movements and her body position changed depending
on the language she was speaking. Right.
And at the time I was in grad school and um,
I thought this is like multiple personality disorder.
So I started researching multiple personality and I,
I sort of came up with this idea,
that language in her case because she learned them all when she was very young
reconfigures the brain in such a way that she actually has different identities
in those languages. Ooh. And next time we were,
I started talking to her in Spanish and she freaked out. She got mad at you.
Yes. She like, like I was, I was a stranger suddenly. Whoa. Yeah.
I just said, I, you know, I just said like you're beautiful or something.
She's like, ah, get away. Wow. GU Eddie's muwa I like get away from me.
You creep like, cause our whole relationship had been in English. Yeah.
Yeah. It was strange. So anyway, so I looked into multiple personality disorder,
the story, everything. Uh, and I dunno if you you've checked that out.
You remember Stanley crippner my buddy who came down and did the podcast with
you? Yeah, he, he had done a bunch of research on that and um,
there was a movie called sybel. Yeah,
I remember that he was the consultant for that movie. Oh,
he was also a consultant for, uh, Rosemary's bay. Remember that? The,
the possession. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Anyway, um, that's a Polansky movie.
I think so. Yeah. Yeah. One of the early ones. Yeah. Um,
people have with multiple personality disorder, uh,
the research is bizarre. It,
it seems to indicate that people have different physiological states in the
different personalities. So you could have a different baseline,
heart rate, blood pressure, uh, you know, these sort of different.
Baseline heart.
Rate. Yeah. In the different even it's now this is dis I,
I don't know how reliable this is,
but I even read that some people have different, uh, ocular pressure.
So that one personality needs reading glasses and another doesn't what,
yeah.
Oh my God. How much is psychosomatic? Like really? Like how, how much,
how much of who you are and how you,
how your body work is dependent upon the way your brain is,
uh, catching things. Right?
Culture, language. Yeah. Personal experience. I mean,
is it all your mood? How much you slept the night before, you know,
all these things, uh,
Ty into identity is something we take for granted, but it's,
if you start to look at, at it, it's like, it's like gravity, you know, gravity,
we sort of included in our calculations,
but nobody has any idea what's happening. Right. How does that work?
Like ohtractive.
Got real touchy about it. Oh really? Yeah, yeah. Yeah. When I brought it up, he,
I think he's,
we had a weird conversation and I think part of the weird conversation,
it was the first conversation that he he's had publicly,
since he's been accused of, you know, right. The, the,
but he came back from that sexual misconduct. Yeah. Well he was, you know,
they found him innocent according to whatever internal right. Um,
investigation they had, you know, when they were doing his television show.
Right. The, you know, planetar but um, it's still,
even if F even if he's proven innocent, you've, you know,
you've got the weight of who knows how many people that think you're a creep
now. Right. You know,
and he's carrying that around because he was always thought of as being this
jovial really sweet, nice guy. So he's a little tense anyway. That's.
Why I start out admitting I'm a creep <laugh> it's good. Ladies and gentlemen,
I am a creep. You.
Can't just take it from there machine <laugh> exactly.
You cannot shame Charlie sheen. Um,
but we had this conversation about gravity and it was weird. It, it was like,
I was arguing with him, but I wasn't arguing. It was like, I was like, what,
what is caus you like, like what causes it? And he's like, we know,
like he went into this whole thing. We know what it is. We know how to,
to measure it. We can that's good enough for me. Yeah. It was,
it was a very tense conversation. Well, that's.
Interesting. Yeah, it was. Cause it is a faith-based thing there, you know,
like he he's right. They know how to measure it.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> but we also know how to measure placebo. Right.
And we don't know how the that works.
We know that hypnosis people can have open heart surgery under hypnosis or have
limbs amp or all sorts of amazing things with no anesthesia whatsoever.
Has that really been done? Oh yeah. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. Have.
You ever been hized.
Yeah, but I, I don't have high hypnotic ability. Mm. That differs.
Uh,
it's another thing that differs among people and Stanley actually has a really
interesting theory, uh, along those lines, which is that in, uh,
prehistoric populations, hypnotic ability would be, um,
uh, adaptive because a lot of the healing rituals were
keying into placebo response. Uh, so if we have a certain ritual,
if you're susceptible to, you know, you believe in that like voodoo, uh,
there's a, you know,
voodoo death people die when they a spell is cast or a Curtis believe. Yeah.
Cause they believe it. If you don't believe it, it doesn't happen.
So it happens, uh, the opposite direction as well with healing. So his,
his idea is that that would've been of a very adaptive, um,
characteristic in prehistoric societies. Whereas in contemporary societies,
it's mal adaptive because you're more susceptible to advertising or you're
easier to manipulate. Yeah. Hmm. Yeah. So I, uh, yeah, I've,
I've uh, when I was in grad school,
I had some professors who worked with hypn this, and I studied it a bit,
uh, along the same,
around the same time I was looking at multiple personality disorder,
cuz I was real interested in this question of how the brain and the body
interact. How much of, you know,
there's all this research showing that people with the same, um, condition in,
in hospitals exactly the same age, same prognosis and all that,
they heal significantly faster if their hospital window looks out on trees
as opposed to looks out at another building. Mm. That,
something like that makes sense. Just looking at something like nature. Yeah.
Keys the body in to S to some sort of energy that,
that helps it to heal completely.
Makes sense. I've met people with multiple personalities. Well,
Roseanne Roseanne's got mul doesn't she make sure that's true. Um, I,
I know another one. That's a weird one is the football player. Hersche Walker.
I think he had traumainduced multiple personality disorders. Wow. Does she?
There's the articles that says like bill, bill ma reminds us. She does.
And then Roseanne says she doesn't so.
Yeah, I think.
And then the does two does one says seven,
having seven personalities is tough her saying it. So.
Yeah. Well here's the thing about Roseanne? I mean,
I'm saying this for the 10th time,
I guess she was hit by a car when she was 15 and she was put in a mental
Institute for nine months afterwards.
She had severe brain of damage and she lost her ability to do mathematics and
like really scrambled her brain.
And that is probably the birth of the Roseanne that we know the comedian. And,
um, that's also the case that Sam Kenon, Sam Kenison was also, uh,
like a pretty normal kid. And then he was hit by a car and, you know,
pretty severe brain damage as well. And, um,
brain damage for especially, um, apparently
as a, especially has an impact on, um, your ability to be, uh,
rational and impulsive behavior. Like people with brain damage.
A lot of times get very impulsive. Yeah. It's a bit very so widely. Yeah.
You know, it's um, what,
what happens to you dependent upon like what kind of trauma,
where the trauma is and what part of your brain, but um, yeah. When,
when they said it about Hersche Walker, I was always confused.
I wonder if it was from football,
like football trauma or was it personal trauma? Like, you know, abuse.
Yeah. People with are diagnosed with multiple personality disorder.
If I remember correctly,
almost always were severely abused as kids mm-hmm <affirmative> you know,
and in fact the, the rationale is that they develop the,
uh, alternate personalities as a way of escaping a reality it's intolerable.
Makes sense.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, look, people do weird things with horrible memories,
you know,
they bury them to the point where they don't even really have access to them
anymore. Yeah. With sexual abuse and some,
some traumatic events when you're young. Yeah. Who but the human brain,
then the way it adapts and molds to things is so bizarre.
Yeah. There's a, there's an anecdote that is in this book, civilized to death.
Notice that EG. Ooh, good segue to the book. Um, pull that over here. Yeah.
It's uh, by the way, the,
the art is done by a guy who listens to my podcast it' oh, really?
It looks like, but the art by a guy looks podcast, <laugh> cheeseburger,
a cheer wearing a cheeseburger with a nice suit on.
Yeah. It's got an iPhone. Um, uh, oh yeah. The story.
So there's a species of grasshopper in
north Africa that, uh, you know,
they hang out they're grasshoppers. They they're dispersed, they eat grass.
They're chill, right? Rains come the grasslands,
expand grasshopper population increases.
Then the rain stop the grasslands contract to the point where the PO the
density of the grasshoppers triggers, uh,
dormant genes. So there's an epigenetic, uh,
event in these grasshoppers and they start to,
to transform and not over generations, individuals,
front legs get shorter back legs, get longer. Thorax changes,
shape of the head changes, coloring changes,
and behavior changes from being these chilled out, solitary,
relaxed grasshoppers. They start attacking each other.
They become cannibalistic. Whoa. And they swarm locus.
Exactly. They become locus. Yeah.
So this species of grasshopper and locus is the same species. Yeah.
It's the same DNA. It's just responding to different conditions. So,
you know,
we were talking about the brain and you know who you are and what identity is
and all that. And this, I was reminded of this when you said, uh, you know,
people are so different and the H two oh thing. Yeah.
We're not only different as individuals in the same context,
we change completely given the context we're in. Yeah.
So the focus of this book is that hunter gatherers were essentially a different
sort of animal. They were essentially, you know, uh,
the parallel is with the grasshoppers and now we're swarming. Yeah.
Now we're a different kind of animal, even though our DNA's the same. Well.
That completely makes sense. I mean,
people that live in small towns are so different than people that live in
cities. Yeah.
It's so rare that you find someone who has a small town sensibility in
Manhattan. Yeah. Chewed up. Yeah. <laugh> right. Literally. Yeah. Yeah.
Literally.